Group members: maurinuzh, s-popo

Summary:
HELP-sequencing (HpaII-tiny fragment Enrichment by Ligation-mediated PCR) is an assay used to quantify the methylation level of a given DNA sample: “[It] is based on a comparison of representations from the genome following digestion by HpaII or its methylation-insensitive isoschizomer MspI. The representations are limited to a size range of 200–2000 bp by the use of ligation-mediated PCR (Khulan et al. 2006: 1)”. This emphasis on small bp polynucleotides gives it an advantage over standard assays, as “increasing the representation of shorter fragments using dual adapters and modified PCR conditions, […] greater coverage of CG-dense regions in particular [are achieved] (Oda et al. 2009: 3835)”. Intriguingly, by developing the HELP assay, it was also found that a number of HpaII sites were not present within the reference human genomic sequence. This further stresses the clear advantage of the HELP-seq over other microarray-based approaches (Oda et al. 2009: 3838).
 Essentially, the steps of producing an HELP assay are pretty standard, a ligase cutting DNA within a biological sample of interest resulting in DNA strands containing pieces of interest, followed by a PCR-amplification and proliferation, albeit mitigated by ligation. On its own, it does not provide much value.
The usage of the HELP assay lies primarily in medical studies or explorative pilot studies. Combined with a Solomon-four-group-design it could infer the effectiveness of a new drug targeting e.g. promoter regions of abnormal proliferation genes. From an inferential point of view, however, there can’t be much derived from a single HELP assay, as only descriptive statistics would be possible.
Khulan, Batbayar, Reid F. Thompson, Kenny Ye, Melissa J. Fazzari, Masako Suzuki, Edyta Stasiek, Maria E. Figueroa, et al. 2006. ‘Comparative Isoschizomer Profiling of Cytosine Methylation: The HELP Assay’. Genome Research 16 (8): 1046–55. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.5273806.
Oda, Mayumi, Jacob L. Glass, Reid F. Thompson, Yongkai Mo, Emmanuel N. Olivier, Maria E. Figueroa, Rebecca R. Selzer, et al. 2009. ‘High-Resolution Genome-Wide Cytosine Methylation Profiling with Simultaneous Copy Number Analysis and Optimization for Limited Cell Numbers’. Nucleic Acids Research 37 (12): 3829–39. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp260.

technology -> application -> statistics:
HELP-seq -> Epygenetic regulation (Metylation) -> t-test/wilcoxon rank-sum test
